One could call this tool as the basis in lean management. Unfortunately the implementation process is not always successful. Thus, this implies a completely destabilised system of improvement which  will interfere (in a destructive way) with any other improvement. This document does not intend to revise the whole 5S methodology. It will point out some to the author critical aspects of 5S.

For clarification, I want to list some (partly subjective) statements regarding 5S – what it is and what it is not:

5S … 
	… is helps creating standards, NOT a laws
	… is NOT just a tool; it is part of the lean philosophy
	… is pointless whether it is not accepted
	… is intended to get work done better (>> focus lies on the employees)
	… provides a basic framework for subsequent improvement
	… as a process is never done (>> continuous improvement).

As a remainder: what are the original 5S'es stand for (derived from Japanese) and what is their main idea:

1. Seiri – Sort
2. Seiton – Simplify
3. Seiso – Sweep
4. Seiketsu – Standardise 
5. Shitsuke – Self Discipline

When pointing towards its implementation I will only pick out some details of these steps which could applied in exactly that order. Before you start make sure that everyone understands the intention of 5S (point out that you will do that for THEM, hence they are the heart of the process – for to start with the initial change; notice that they have their chance to get rid of their claims; lead and help them in an active manner during the whole process).

I would recommend to do the process as a part of a workshop. Do not choose too big areas for a change at once – increment piecewise. You will notice that the motivation will decrease dramatically after a few hours. Therefore it is important to lead them especially at the very beginning. Otherwise they will be empirically quite disorganised and lost. That is because they cannot have the experience which they will gather, however, after a view sessions. Again, use their potential absolutely during the first few hours.

1. Seiri – Sort
Eliminate everything you do not need (>> you will be surprised of the result). Seriously, everything means all of it, that is: rejects, tools, relics, etc. Remove stocks, ...

2. Seiton – Simplify
Provide stuff to support the improvement process, that is “shadowboards”, cases, mounts, tools, etc.  Keep their work-flow in mind and/or ask them for it.

3. Seiso – Sweep
Cleanness means safety. This step supports a kind of revision of steps Seiton and Seiri. A clean working area provides higher motivation during work.


>> Schedule what cannot be done right now.
4. Seiketsu – Standardise
Do not implement 5S without this step. As a result of PDCA standardisation keeps the system going and allows further improvements – all the time. Set standards which are realisable. Improve these standards. Visualise them. Visualise their progress. Note that one goal is that almost everyone could do this work after standardisation (>> polyvalence).

5. Shitsuke – Self Discipline
Use Top-Down approach. There will not be any improvement (on the long run) if the management does not live and respect the philosophy and its standards. Do audits. Be aware that theses audits are part of the improvement process and not a tool to penalise the employees. Emphasise and visualise progress, not failure.
